


Ambient Designs        Proprietary                   5 - 15 - 84


                               PLANETSIDE


I. Information Displays.

   1. Status
              Date   :   9012 - 09 - 21
              Speed  :  25 kms/hr
              Energy :  999
              Cargo  :  50
              Weapon :  Laser
              Screen :  Tactical
              Ship   :  120 deg. 85 kms

   2. Default
              Terrain     :  Craggy rock
              Temperature :  8 deg C., very cold
              Atmosphere  :  Overcast yellow sky
              Elevation   :  3500 meters
              Surface Type Key
                  lava,liquid,ice,snow,rock,lifeform,sand,mud 

    3. Scan
              Volume              :  1.5 cubic meters
              Aggression analog   :  Rabbit
              Intelligence analog :  Dog
              Niche               :  Photosynthetic Herbiverore
              Composition         :  Silicon, Nitrogen, Carbon
              Reliability         :  85%


II. Mechanics

    When  the "leave ship" option is chosen the message is  given 
"fueling  Terrain Vehicle".  After a brief pause and sound effect 
it says:  "Terrain Vehicle fueled. Fuel remaining in ship: xxxx". 
The  Terrain  Vehicle (TV) is always fueled to  its  maximum  (if 
possible) of 999. (The amount of fuel the TV leaves the ship with 
is  saved,  and  when it reaches half this amount it flashes  and 
beeps briefly with a warning : "fuel supply half gone".)
    Now  the planetside display is put up.  The tactical  map  is 
shown,  and on it is the ship icon and next to it the TV icon. As 
always  the status and crew displays are shown,  and in the  text 
window  is  the default description.  (see Info display  #2)  The 
joystick controls the cursor in the option bar which is presently 
at the far left.  The options in the option bar are, from left to 
right:   
   Screen         Move        Look         Scan         Weapons  
        

THE PLAYFIELD

SCREEN:  This  toggles  the  view screen between the  2  possible 
displays - the Tactical and the Contour map.  The view screen  is 
120  pixels  high by 72 pixels wide.  This is not  including  the 
border.  The  Tactical  map is broken up into 9 wide by  15  high 
blocks.  Each  block  is 8 pixels wide by 8  high.  (2  Commodore 
character  cells)  Each of these 8 by 8 blocks is represented  on 
the  Contour  map by a single pixel.  This means  that  the  area 
covered  by  the Tactical map is 9 pixels wide by 15 high on  the 
Contour map.  8 by 8 total Tactical maps fit on one Contour  map. 
The  Contour map is broken down into blocks each 4 pixels wide by 
8  high (1 Commodoer character cell).  This is the resolotion  of 
the terrain contours.  The boundries of these contours,  and  the 
boundries  of  the  surfaces on the Tactical map are  roughed  up 
fractally  however,  so  it appears that the resolution  on  both 
screens is 1 pixel.
    The  Contour map is a static map used for reference.  If  one 
block  on  the  Tactical map,  and one pixel on the  Contour  map 
equals 100 by 100 meters,  then the entire Contour map represents 
an  area  of  7.2 kilometers wide  by  12  kilometers  high.  The 
Tactical  map  represents  an ares of .9 kilometers wide  by  1.5 
kilometers high.  (These distances have no actual bearing on  the 
gameplay but serve only to provide a general referance in design)
    Altitude information is represented on the Contour map  using 
a fixed color scale. No altitude information, other than the text 
in the default,  is presented on the Tactical map.  Minimal icons 
are shown on the Contour map. these are :
     1. The Tactical Map Box - a 10 by 16 black box
     2. The Player - a red box with a white dot
     3. Minerals - a 5 pixel black X
     4. Ruins -   an 8 pixel black box
When the Contour map is put up "Screen :" in status is changed to 
"Contour".  Also the text in the text window is replaced with the 
color scale. If any other option is hit the screen returns to the 
Tactical map.   
    Any  given 4 by 8 character cell on the Contour map is either 
Blue : liquid          Lt Green : < 1000
Red  : lava     or     Dk Green : 1000 - 2000
Cyan : ice             Yellow   : 2000 - 3000
                       Orange   : 3000 - 4000
                       Brown    : 4000 - 6000
                       Grey     : 6000 - 8000 
                       White    : > 8000
Altitude is important in game play in 5 different ways -
THE FIVE SACRED WAYS - 
 1) creates a feeling of environment
 2) creates identifiable landmarks
 3)  allows for efficiency in planet navigation (going uphill  is 
     very slow and inefficient)
 4) creates specific environments in which certain species may be 
    found 
 5) helps player locate minerals which are generally found in the 
    mountains 

   As  mentioned earlier the smallest unit of resolution  on  the 
Tactical  map is an 8 by 8 pixel block.  Each block may be one of 
nine General Surface Types.   Each General Surface Type is broken 
down  into many Specific Surface Types.  These  Specific  Surface 
Types  are  used in the text descriptions and serve only  to  add 
flavor  to  the planet description.  A background color  and  dot 
color is associated with each of the General Surface Types. While 
it  is true that any block may be a different surface type ,  the 
algorithms  that determine surface type generally clump  them  in 
large areas (this may vary with the particular type).
   In  addition each surface type has a movement factor from 0 to 
5  associated with it.  This a factor that modifies the speed  at 
which the TV can move over the surface.  A factor of 0  indicated 
that the vehicl is destroyed if it enters that surface.  1 is the 
slowest the TV may move and 5 is the fastest.
NOTE:  When  a  single surface covers the entire View Screen  and 
there  are  no icons visible it will not be possible  to  discern 
movement.  This is the function of the dots.  For any given block 
there is a 35% chance that there is a dot in it. If there is, the 
dot is placed randomly.

  General Surface Types    Colors     Dot Colors    Mvmnt Factor
  ---------------------    ------     ----------    ------------
1.     Liquid             Dk. Blue       Cyan           3                 
2.     Ice                Cyan           White          4
3.     Lava               Red            Orange         0
4.     Rock (Dirt)        Grey           Brown          5
5.     Carpet Life.       Lt Green       Black          5
6.     Snow               Blue-White     Cyan           3
7.     Sand               Yellow         Orange         3
8.     Mud (Quicksand)    Violet         Black          1
9.     Crystal [PROBE]    Green-White    Dk Blue        5

Only surface 1 - 8 are included in the key to surface type in the 
text window default display for the Tactical map.        

    Placed  on top of these surfaces are icons.  Following  is  a 
list of all the possible icons found on the Tactical map.

1.  Terrain Vehicle
2.  Ship
3.  Mineral Deposit
4.  Recent Ruins
5.  Ancient Ruins
6.  Dropped Cargo

7.  Black Probe Control Nexus

LIFEFORMS
8.  Bilateral (animal) no legs, snakelike
9.  Bilateral (animal) no legs, not snakelike
10. Bilateral (animal) 1 leg/tent.
11. Bilateral (animal) 2 legs/tents.
12. Bilateral (animal) 3 or 4 legs
13. Bilateral (animal) more than 4 legs or 2 tents.
14. Radial/Spherical (plant or animal) no legs
15. Radial Spherical (plant or animal) 1 or 2 legs/tents.
16. Radial/Spherical (plant or animal) more than 2 legs/tents.
17. Amorphous/Irregular (plant or animal) no legs
18. Amorphous/Irregular (plant or animal) legs or tent.
19. Leaved (plant) small, type A
20. Leaved (plant) small, type B
21. Leaved (plant) medium, type A
22. Leaved (plant) medium, type B 
23. Leaved (plant) large, type A
24. Leaved (plant) large, type B
25. Flying (plant or animal)
26. Floating (plant or animal)
27. A stunned lifeform ??? (perhaps not necessary)
28. A dead lifeform

29. The look eyeball
30. The scanning cursor

All  icons  (except for the TV which may be on liquid or mud  and 
creatures  in  flight which may appear over anything)  may  never 
appear on: liquid, mud, or lava.

Icons  may be any but the following  colors:  grey1,  grey2,  lt. 
green,  yellow,  cyan,  or  blue-white.  Creatures in flight  are 
always black.
   The  same  picture  icon  may  appear  as  a  different  color 
depending on the species. The icons are saved in such a form that 
whatever  portion of them is yellow takes on the new  color.  The 
particular  color  or icon for any given species is part  of  its 
species record.
   The  flying and floationg icons are used when the creature  is 
currently flying or floating and may be applied to any  lifeform. 
Airborne creatures may not be dealt with by the player.

GAMEPLAY

MOVE:  When  in  the move mode the joystick controls  operate  as 
follows - 

-) Moving the joystick - moves the TV. The TV stays in the center 
of  the  screen  and  the  terrain  scrolls.  The  icon  is  non-
directional  and  moves  in whatever direction  the  joystick  is 
pushed.  The  TV accelerates to a maximum speed from a stop  and 
then  stays  at that maximum.  The maximum is determined  by  the 
surface type of the terrain. As previously stated movement occurs 
only  on  the Tactical map.  The TV may move over any other  icon 
accept a flying creature (these have highest priority). If the TV 
moves  into a lava terrain a warning message is given ("The  heat 
from the lava is too much - we're burning up").  If the TV  still 
does  not  move off it is destroyed.  Moving over icons does  not 
slow  the TV down.  When pressure is released from  the  joystick 
TV movement stops immediately. 
   Whenever moving energy is used at a constant rate of units per 
time.  Tentatively it will use 1 unit every 10 seconds of driving 
time. (This will need to be calibrated)
   If  an interaction is not occuring the default information  is 
presented in the text window (see info display #3).

-)  Pressing  the button while the joystick is pushed  - fires  a 
weapon in the direction the joystick is pressed. Either the laser 
or  the  stunner fires depending on which is  currently  mounted. 
When  the  laser  is  fired a flickering  line  appears  in  that 
direction.  The  line lasts for about 1/2 a second and goes about 
3/4  of the distance from the TV to the edge of the View  Screen. 
The  stunner  fires in a small cone rather than a line  and  goes 
about 1/2 as far as the laser.  The laser uses 8 units of  energy 
each time it is fired. The stunner uses 4. 
   Each time the laser is fired,  if it hits,  it does from 20 to 
100 points of damage.(determined randomly) [lifeforms may have up 
to 256 hit points] The effect of the stunner on any given species 
is  drawn  from that specie's Species record.  The  lifeform  may 
either be 1) unaffected 2) stunned for some period of time or  3) 
killed. 
   It  is  impossible to hit a lifeform with a weapon when it  is 
directly under the TV.  Thus lifeforms will never move there.  It 
is possible for the TV to move over them,  though.  Lifeforms may 
attack  the  TV from underneath,  or from any of the  8  adjacent 
squares.  As many as 9 lifeforms may attack at once.  Whenever an 
attack occurs the message is given "Captain,we're being attacked"
and  the  crew's vitality is  modified  if  necessary.  Lifeforms 
attacking  the  TV takes precedence over everything  else.  Other 
activites are interupted if the player is busy when attacked.

-)  Pressing  the  button twice at any time  without  moving  the 
joystick  - causes the cursor in the option bar to be  controlled 
by the joystick.

-)  Pressing the joystick button whil on top of an icon  - causes 
the following things to happen:
  1) MINERAL DEPOSIT - The message is given " A deposit of _____. 
  XX.X cubic meters. Shall we mine it Captain?  <-- NO  YES --> "       
  If  the answer is "NO" then nothing happens.  If the answer  is 
  "YES"  the message is given "Hold button down to mine." For  as 
  long  as  the button is held down a "Dink-Dink" sound is  heard 
  and  minerals  are  transfered from the ground  to  the  TV  in 
  increments  of  1/10 of a cubic meter.  If all of the  minerals 
  have been mined a message is given to that effect. If only part 
  of  the minerals are mined,  and the mine is later returned  to 
  (and  the  player has not left the planet) the  remainder  will 
  still be there.  If the player leaves the planet,  all  partial 
  deposits still remaining are thrown away.


  NOTE:  Whenever the player wants to take on cargo, but there is 
  not enough room, the message is given - "There is no more cargo 
  space,  sir.  Shall we drop something?  <-- NO YES --> " If the 
  answer  is "YES" the message is given "What shall we drop?" and 
  a list of the cargo is given.  To the right of the list is  the 
  word  "Quit".  The  list  has a highlighting cursor in  it  and 
  scrolls  up and down.  Items in the list are presented  in  the 
  following manner:
  Lifeforms -
            Item  no.  - Simily or # legges or symmetry (in  that 
            priority) : XX.X cubic meters
  Minerals -
            Mineral name - : XX.X cubic meters
  Artifacts - 
            Artifact (estimated value) : XX.X cubic meters

  As  many items as desired may be dropped.  Minerals are dropped 
  in the same manner in which they are picked up - in  increments 
  of  1/10 of a cubic meter.  Items remaining in the list  always 
  keep the same item number.

  NOTE:  The Terrain Vehicle,  a cargo pod, and the ship hold all 
  have a capacity of 50 cubic meters. 
       
  2)  ANCIENT RUINS - The message is given "Very ancient  looking 
  pyramid  shaped riuns of crystal." Then one of two messages  is 
  given:  a) "Captain,  we have discovered XXX lumps of Endurium. 
  (XX.X cubic meters) shall we take it?  <-- NO YES -->" ( 1 lump 
  is  equivalent  to  1 unit of endurium and has a volume  of  .1 
  cubic  meters,  or 1 cubic decimeter.) If the answer  is  "YES" 
  give the message "Hold button down to pick up" and pick up like 
  minerals.  OR  b) "Captain,  we have discovered a truly amazing 
  artifact.  We estimate its value at _______ mu.s.  (XX.X  cubic 
  meters)  Shall  we take it?  <-- NO YES -->" If the  answer  is 
  "YES" give the message "Storing item # XX"

  In any Ancient Ruin there is at least one thing to find.  There 
  may be from 0 to 4 truly amazing artifacts.  Determine how many 
  there are randomly:  60% theres 1
                       25% theres 2
                       10% theres 3
                        5% theres 4
  Also  determine  the  value of  each  artifact.  Truly  amazing 
  artifacts  may  be  worth from 500 to 5000 mus.  Use  a  normal 
  distribution  slope  with the peak at 500.  For  the  estimated 
  value  roll  a RND no.  from -50% to 50% of the  actual  value. 
  Again  use a normal distribution with the peak at 0.  Add  this 
  value to the actual value to get the estimated value. (round to 
  the nearest 100).

  3) RECENT RUINS :  The message is given: "Ruins from the period 
  of the Old Empire.  Then one of 2 messages: a) Captain, we have 
  discovered  an amazing artifact.  We estimate its value at  XXX 
  mu.s.  Shall we take it? <-- NO YES -->" There may be 0 to 4 of 
  these (determined same as above,  and the value range is 50  to 
  1000  mu.s.  (estimate  is determined same as above.) Then  the 
  message  is  given:  "Storing item # XXX."    OR  b)  "We  have 
  discovered  some  writing on _______.  It says  _______.  Press 
  button  to  continue"  There  may  be from  0  to  4  of  these 
  (determined same as the artifacts)



  4)  DROPPED CARGO - The message says "Dropped Cargo".  It  then 
  lists  each item as it was listed in the  drop-list  (including 
  the item no.s) and for each item it asks:  "Shall we pick it up 
  Cap'n?" If the answer is yes give the message "Restoring item # 
  XX" for each item.

  5) DEAD LIFEFORM - The message reads:  "A dead lifeform.  Shall 
  we  record it in our data banks?  <-- NO YES -->" If the answer 
  is "YES" there is a whiring noise while the word "Recording" is 
  presented.  Then  it  reads "Data collection  completed,  sir." 
  Recording uses 2 units of energy.

  6)  A  LIFEFORM - The message  reads  "A  lifeform.
                    ^
  <-- IGNORE      CAPTURE    RECORD  -->  " If  the  response  is 
  "Record" then do the same as above.  If the response is capture 
  then  there  is a suspenseful noise.  Capturing takes  about  6 
  seconds  while  recording takes about  3.  Capturing  does  not 
  require  energy.  Capturing raises the aliens EDL.  During  the 
  capturing  or  recording process if the alien is not mobile  it 
  will  not run away.  If it is stunned it will not run  away  or 
  attack.  If the alien runs away before the process is completed 
  then  the attempt is aborted and the message is given :"it  got 
  away".  If  the alien attacks before the process is completed , 
  completion  of  the process is delayed.  The  party  will  take 
  damage,  but  if  they  remain sooner or later the  process  of 
  recording or capturing will be completed (of course they may be 
  killed first)  If capturing is successful the message is given: 
  "The  alien lifeform has been captured and put in  stasis.  Now 
  loading into T.V." If there is enough room in cargo the message 
  is given "The lifeform is stored as item # XX".
     If  the  lifeform is captured or recorded a value  is  saved 
  with  it.   When  the  player  returns  to  starport   recorded 
  information  is automatically paid for.  Captured specimens may 
  be  sold  in  the trade depot along  with  minerals.  Value  is 
  computed as follows:
    
    Base Value:    A new class   -    50 + X
                   A new order   -    20 + X
                   A new species -     5 + X
                   Same species  -     0
   
    X  is  a bonus given for valuable attributes and is given  in 
    the  form  of  a % of the base value.  It is  given  for  the 
    following things:
    a) intelligence - intelligence is a number from 1 to 100. Use 
                      this  number  as the % and add  it  to  the 
                      base.
    b)  niche - If the lifeform has B as its highest niche add 25 
                % of the base.  If it has C as its highest  niche 
                add  50% of the base.
    c)   size - Take its size in cubic decimeters (with a max  of 
                100) and add that as a %
    d)  carbon - Carbon may be in one of 4 possible positions.
                 none    -   add 50% of base
                 3rd     -   add 30% of base
                 2nd     -   add 10% of base
                 1st     -   add 0
  If  the  lifeform was recorded and it is dead cut its value  in 
  half.
  If the lifeform was captured multiply its value by 5. 



LOOK  :  This option causes all movement on the screen to  freeze 
and an eyeball to appear hovering in front of the screen  staring 
at  the player.  A loud voice is then heard "You have sinned  and 
now you shall pay." A lightening bolt then strikes the player and 
he is banished to the depths of hell for the rest of eternity. In 
the event that this doesn't happen the eyeball appears as an icon 
on  the screen.  Moving the joystick moves the eyeball.  When the 
button  is pressed a description of the icon the eyeball is  over 
is given. 

Lifeforms :  The detailed description is used from the  template. 
In  addition  to  the physical description any  current  Movement 
behavior is given as well as Alive/Dead/Stunned info is given.

Minerals  :  "An  outcropping of  minerals.  Possibly  incredibly 
valuable and useful"

Ancient  Ruins :  "A very ancient looking  crystaline  structure, 
beautiful and mysterious."

Recent Ruins : A random description from a set of 8 ruins phrases

Dropped Cargo : "Ex-Cargo (good with garlic and butter sauce)"

Looking  takes no energy.  When in this mode a message is present 
at the bottom "Hit any key for options"

SCAN  :  This  option also causes all movement to  freeze  and  a 
cursor  ( 4 inward arrows) to appear.  When the button is pressed 
if  there  is  a  lifeform in the cursor  the  scanning  data  is 
presented.  (See info display #3) Scanning uses 1 unit of energy. 
Hitting any key returns to the option bar. If the attempt is made 
to  scan  anything but a lifeform the message is given  :  "There 
must be a lifeform present to scan".

WEAPON :  This option simply allows the player to toggle the  two 
weapons that can be mounted on the TV, the laser and the stunner. 
This does not freeze the action. Thus the player must stop moving 
to  affect  this  change,  and while it is occuring (it  takes  a 
moment) animals may be moving or even attacking. 




